Once around Europa.
So Europa, the second of the Galilean
moons of Jupiter. You can see the four
moons there in this small image that I
took with a 6-in reflecting telescope
quite a few years ago with the planet in
the center, the cloud belts across it,
and the four moons stretched out. And of
course, these were discovered originally
by Galileo.
Here is his note page of his
observations of these four little moons
in orbit around Jupiter. Part of
convincing him that not everything
revolved around the Earth and that the
Capernac view with the sun at the center
of the solar system was probably a
better model.
In terms of the those four moons, we
have Io on the left, Europa, Ganymede
and Kalisto on the right. And you can
see their relative sizes. These are to
scale and how the surface of them are
very very different. And then the pie
chart at the bottom is the masses of
those moons with Ganymede the largest
being the most massive followed by
Kalisto. Um then Io and Europa being the
smallest and lightest weight of the lot.
in it's the second moon out from
Jupiter. Io is the closest and it's
around about the same size of uh its
terms of its diameter as the Earth's
moon. And the most striking thing about
it is the shiny white ice covered in
this reddish brown material um with uh
all those linear features being the most
intense places where you find the brown
covering and a few impact craters.
There's one bright white impact crater
just to the lower right of the center
there where something has struck Europa
and clearly thrown a lot of white
ejector out. We think the white color is
ice. And here are some more photographs
of the surface of Europa. Zooming in in
detail on those linear features, showing
how it seems that these are cracks in
the ice with this dirty brown material
coming up from beneath.
Also venting from those cracks are vapor
plumes. And we have a flyby image
showing back scattered light from the
vapor plumes on the right and a Hubble
Space Telescope image set on the left
showing some venting of these materials.
And we can associate the exact position
of those with some of those cracks
across the surface. It all lines up.
This is water coming up from beneath the
ice surface, bursting out into the
vacuum of space and flashing back into
uh crystalline ice which then rains back
down across the surface creating that
ice covered crust. Some of it is of
course lost to space every time, but a
lot of it falls back uh under the
gravitational influence of the moon.
So in terms of what's going on, we think
that there is a uh metal core as a lot
of these small worlds have overlaying by
a rocky interior and then we have a
liquid water ocean and an ice covering.
And it is the heat from the core coming
up, warming the ocean and then pushing
that warm water up through the ice,
through the cracks and venting to space
that we have detected. But the
interesting thing is what are those
brown materials that are coming up with
it? Uh what is that telling us? It seems
like they were formed beneath the ice
and then brought to the surface. That's
why they're most intense where the
cracks are rather than them perhaps
being formed on the surface after the
material's been deposited because uh the
cracks are clearly where the stuff is
coming from and where it's darkest.
Now, the interior of Europa is kept warm
by this tugofwar, the orbital
interaction. As the planets go around
Jupiter, they are in a tidal lock so
that Io keeps meeting Europa every other
time and there is a 1 to two to four
relationship between them. So they keep
pushing each other and shoving each
other into more elliptical rather than
circular orbits and that changes the
distance from Jupiter. And when the
distance is changed, the the alignment
between the moon and Jupiter can't
remain quite stable. They can't quite
keep one face towards Jupiter all the
time because the speed of orbit depends
on the position. If you're in an
elliptical orbit, you will move slower
when you're further away and faster when
you're nearby, but you're still going to
rotate on your uh own axis of spin at
the same speed. And so you get either
ahead or behind in terms of the
alignment of one face towards the
planet. And this stretches and squishes
the moon due to the tidal effects of
Jupiter's gravity. And that creates
friction which heats up the center.
That's why Io is so volcanic and it's
what's keeping Europa warm in the
center. And that is what is melting the
ice and keeping us with the liquid water
ocean. And in terms of water, there is
actually more water on Europa than there
is on planet Earth in all of our oceans
and subsurface reservoirs all added up.
And this is amazing. Io, which orbits
closer to Jupiter and gets more heating,
has been dried out. It has lost all that
water. It's so hot being so close to
Jupiter. And the tidal effect drops off
as the cube of the distance. So if
you're twice as close, you get eight
times the effect. So the uh temperature
on Io is so much higher that all of the
water would have melted and then been
boiled away into space long ago. So it
was probably much more massive in the
past. Whereas Europa, it's just enough
to keep the interior warm such that the
water is not frozen and but at the
surface it's then protected from the
vacuum of space by an ice layer. So it's
just at that right temperature.
But the core is pretty warm. And it's
quite probable that underneath that ice,
if you were to go down to the boundary
between the floor of the ocean and the
core, you're going to get the same sort
of influence that we have on Earth. And
this is a black smoker at the bottom of
the Atlantic Ocean on Earth where water
is permeating into the crust getting
heated and then bursting back up as
superheated water at 200° centigrade
carrying a lot of minerals with it. And
then as it meets the cooler ocean, those
minerals are dumped out as the black
material that you see in the vent there,
solidifying out, coating the rest of the
ocean floor with this coating of
minerals. But all of that heat and
energy is creating a sort of active
environment where there's a chemical
imbalance. A lot of iron and a lot of
sulfur being brought to the surface
creating the ideal environment for life
to have probably originated by latching
on to this chemical imbalance and the
iron and sulfur being crucial to it. And
so all of those ingredients seem to be
highly probable
at the core ocean boundary of Europa.
And wouldn't it be fascinating if we
could do more than just fly by or even
just land on the surface of Europa?
Maybe we could do that and sample some
of the brown material and make some
analysis of it and determine what it is.
But what we really need is to land some
sort of nuclear drill that can bore a
hole down through the ice and it's very
thick in places. We might find a thin
patch that would be useful and release a
submarine which could then explore
around the oceans of Europa. may be
going and looking for these black
smokers on the floor and uh maybe we
would discover that uh there is in fact
already quite sophisticated life down
there. I think it's quite likely but who
knows? Maybe one day we'll be able to do
this.
So that's once around Europa. Thanks
very much for listening to that and I
hope you've enjoyed it.